Thank you, everybody.  Thank you! Everybody, please have a seat. Have a seat. Thank you so much.  Well, hello, West Virginia!   Go, Mountaineers!  It is great to be back in what is clearly one of the most beautiful states in the United States of America.  One of these days, I’m going to finally try a Tudor’s Biscuit.   

I want to begin by thanking Jordan for sharing his extraordinary story with us.  Jordan is living proof that, when it comes to substance abuse, treatment and recovery, those things are possible if we work together and if we care about each other. And that’s what we’re here to talk about today.  

We've got some outstanding leaders who care deeply about this issue.  I want to thank your Governor, Earl Ray Tomblin, for being here.  Your two fine senators -- Joe Manchin and Shelley Moore Capito.  And Charleston Mayor Danny Jones.  We’ve also got some outstanding members of my administration who are here -- first and foremost, our proud daughter of West Virginia, HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell.  We have the Director of National Drug Control Policy, Michael Botticelli.  And we have the head of the Drug Enforcement Administration, Chuck Rosenberg.  Where’s Chuck?  He’s around here somewhere. 

And what I want to do is to have a conversation with the panelists here today, take some questions -- because this is something that is not a top-down solution type of problem alone. This is going to have to be everybody working together.  And we've got to understand what families are going through, what law enforcement is going through, what our health systems are going through in order for us to wrap our arms around this problem.  So instead of giving a long speech, I just want to offer some initial thoughts to frame our discussion.

When I came into office, I started studying this issue -- what’s called opioids.  And I was stunned by the statistics.  More Americans now die every year from drug overdoses than they do from motor vehicle crashes.  More than they do from car accidents.  The majority of those overdoses involve legal prescription drugs.  In 2013 alone, overdoses from prescription pain medications killed more than 16,000 Americans.  One year.  I don't have to tell you, this is a terrible toll.  The numbers are big, but behind those numbers are incredible pain for families.  And West this state is home to the highest rate of overdose deaths in the nation.  

Now, addiction is not new.  But since 1999, sales of powerful prescription pain medications have skyrocketed by 300 percent. In 2012, 259 million prescriptions were written for these drugs, which is more than enough to give every American adult their own bottle of pills.  

And as their use has increased, so has the misuse.  Some folks are prescribed these medications for good reason but they become addicted because they’re so powerful.  At the same time, we’ve seen a dramatic rise in the use of heroin, which belongs to the same class of drugs as painkillers -- this class of drugs known as “opioids.”  In fact, four in five heroin users -- new heroin users -- started out by misusing prescription drugs; then they switched to heroin.  So this really is a gateway drug -- that prescription drugs become a gateway to heroin.  As a consequence, between 2002 and 2013, the number of heroin-related deaths in America nearly quadrupled, although the number of heroin-related overdoses is still far exceeded by the number of legal prescription drug overdoses.  

So this crisis is taking lives.  It’s destroying families.  It’s shattering communities all across the country.  And that’s the thing about substance abuse -- it doesn’t discriminate.  It touches everybody -- from celebrities to college students, to soccer moms, to inner city kids.  White, black, Hispanic, young, old, rich, poor, urban, suburban, men and women.  It can happen to a coal miner; it can happen to a construction worker; a cop who is taking a painkiller for a work-related injury.  It could happen to the doctor who writes him the prescription. 

Now, one of the problems we have is too many families suffer in silence, feeling like they were the only ones struggling to help a loved one.  And let’s face it, there’s still fear and shame and stigma that too often surrounds substance abuse -- and often prevents people from seeking the help that they deserve.  Because when people loosely throw around words like “junkie,” nobody wants to be labeled in that way. 

And part of our goal here I think today is to replace those words with words like father, or daughter, or son, or friend, or sister.  Because then you understand there is a human element behind this.  This could happen to any of us in any of our families.  What if we replaced a word like “junkie” with recovery coaches and specialists like Jordan?  

We can’t fight this epidemic without eliminating stigma.  That's one of the reasons why I’m so proud of Michael, who’s the first person in the job of dealing with drugs in America who actually knows what it’s like to recover from an addiction.  He shares his own story as a way to encourage others to get the help that they need before it’s too late.  And I’m proud that there’s some elected officials in this state who’ve told their stories about what happened in their family and to themselves in order for us to start lowering those attitudes that keep people from getting help.

So I’ve made this a priority for my administration.  And we're not new to this.  In 2010, we released our first National Drug Control Strategy.  We followed that up in 2011 with a Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention Plan.  We’re implementing those plans.  We're partnering with communities to prevent drug use, reduce overdose deaths, help people get treatment.  And under the Affordable Care Act, more health plans have to cover substance abuse disorders.  The budget that I sent Congress would invest in things like state overdose prevention programs, preparing more first responders to save more lives, and expanding medication assisted treatment programs.  

So we have to make those investments.  Rather than spending billions of dollars -- taxpayer dollars -- on long prison sentences for nonviolent drug offenders, we could save money and get better outcomes by getting treatment to those who need it.   

And we could use some of the savings to make sure that law enforcement has the resources to go after the hardened criminals who are bringing hard drugs like heroin into our country.  So with no other disease do we expect people to wait until they're a danger to themselves or others to self-diagnose and seek treatment.  Every other disease -- you got a broken leg, you got diabetes, you got some sort of sickness, we understand that we got to get you help.  And we also understand when it comes to other diseases that if we don't give you help, and let you suffer by yourself, then other people could get sick.  Well, this is an illness.  And we got to treat it, as such.  We have to change our mindset.   

And this is one of the reasons that the DEA declared a “National Prescription Drug Take-Back Day” -- a day when Americans can safely and conveniently dispose of expired and unwanted prescription drugs in their communities.  Because most young people who begin misusing prescription drugs don’t buy them in some dark alley -- they get them from Mom or Dad’s medicine cabinet.  

And today, we’re also announcing some new actions.  First, we’re ensuring that federal agencies train federal health care providers who prescribe opioids.  This is a common-sense idea that you’re already implementing here in West Virginia.  Congress should follow that lead and make this a national priority.  And we look forward to working with governors and the medical community as well.

Second -- and we were talking -- Joe and I were talking on the flight over here -- there is evidence that shows that medication assisted treatment, if done properly, in combination with behavioral therapy and other support and counseling and 12-step programs and things like that, can work.  It can be an effective strategy to support recovery.  But it can't just be replacing one drug with another.  It’s got to be part of a package.  So we’re going to identify any barriers that still exist that are keeping us from creating more of these treatment facilities, and incorporating them into our federal programs.

Private sector partners are helping out to help fight this epidemic, as well.  And I want to give them some credit.  More than 40 medical groups, from the American Medical Association to the American Dental Association are committing to concrete actions.  And we need to, obviously, work with the medical community -- because they're the front lines on prescribing this stuff and so there’s got to be a sense of responsibility and ownership and accountability there.  We’ve got to expand prescriber training.  Increasing the use of naloxone -- I wanted to make sure I was pronouncing that right, so I talked to the expert -- naloxone -- this is something that if first responders have it can often save quickly the lives of somebody who is having an overdose.  So we want to make sure that first responders have a supply of this.

We want to make sure that we're getting more physicians certified to provide medication assisted treatment.  We then have broadcasters like CBS that are providing airtime for education and awareness.  And groups like the NBA have committed to running public service announcements about drug abuse.  So that's just an example of some of the private sector partnerships that we're forging here.  

The point is -- and I’m going to end with this -- we’ve all got a role to play.  Because young people like Jordan, they remind us these are our kids.  It’s not somebody else’s kids; it’s our kids.  It’s not somebody else’s neighborhood; it’s our neighborhood.  And they deserve every chance.  We’ve got to make sure that we're doing right by them, we're taking this seriously.  And the goal today is to shine a spotlight on this, and then make sure that we walk away out of here, all of us committed to doing something about it.  Whether we are a faith leader, whether we are an elected official, whether we're in law enforcement, whether we're a private citizen, a business, we’ve all got a role to play.  You understand that here in West Virginia, and we want to make sure the whole country understands how urgent this problem is.